>> Kyle: I'd like to talk about,
a way of doing typing that doesn't require
us to limit our coding style just
to accomplish type-aware linting.
>> Kyle: The lack of runtime
behavior by the way, is a big deal.
Maybe I should've made a bigger
deal about this earlier.
But the idea that the way
to get assertions or
guarantees about your codes behavior
in something like Typescript and
Flow is that you necessarily have to
change what you would normally do
about your coding so that the things that
are obvious are obvious to the compiler.
I do think it's important for your types
to be obvious, but there is a difference
between making something obvious
to the reader of the code and
making something obvious to the computer.
Those are different, and
we kind of conflate those two.
So essentially, the complete,
that there's no way that TypeScript
could benefit you in the run time.
All the benefit that you
got was at compile time and
what they admitted was JavaScript that
didn't have any type script-ishness to it.
So that means that to get all of that
benefit, you really have to change
what you do, and I think that what you
change it into is less like JavaScript.
So what would this alternative look like?
Well, I've been playing around for the
last several weeks, or month, a month and
a half, I've been playing around with
an idea for a type-aware linter that I
believe embraces what JavaScript's
typing system is about.
That gives us more tooling,
gives us more confidence, but
doesn't try to change JavaScript
into something it's not.
That project is called TypL.
>> Kyle: There's no documentation on
this yet, so if you go to the repo,
you'll see that there's a bunch of code
and a bunch of tests and no documentation.
This is still alpha, we have a set of
issues that we're tracking towards a 1.0,
which I hope will happen fairly soon.
So you're getting an early sneak
peek of this project in action, or
before it's in action,
you're getting an early sneak peek of it.
But before I even show
you some code examples,
I wanna talk about my motivations.
From that list of cons, how would I design
a type-aware linter that I think goes more
with the grain of JavaScript?
So number one, I think we need only
standard JavaScripts syntax, and
I don't mean just code comments.
I mean we need to be able to
embrace just JavaScript that way,
we prevent ourselves from having
a sort of ecosystem lock in.
Number two, I think it's critical that
we have both a compiler component and
a runtime component.
By runtime component I mean,
that there are runtime assertions that
could exist in the code that you ship,
and that would assert things and
let you know if there were problems.
Because I don't think it's healthy for
us to contort our coding styles just so
that we can only get
them from the compiler.
But this is also critical,
you should have the option of
using one of the other or both.
You should not have to use the system
that has to have a compiler or
has to have a runtime you
should have that option.
And if you said, listen,
I only want the compiler, not the runtime,
that ought to be an option.
If you said, I only want the runtime and
not the compiler,
that ought to be an option.
The systems that exist today don't
really give you any choices along that.
So that was a strong motivation for TypL.
Number three, in the style of ESLint I
want everything configurable.
So the way TypL works is that
it complains about everything.
And then you tell it what
complaints you don't wanna see.
So it will complain about all the things
that Typescript and Flow and all them
would complain about and a bunch of stuff
that they don't complain about and then
you get to decide with those preferences
which of those errors is useful to you.
And it gets us fine-grained to saying
I want to allow double equals to do
strings and numbers but
nothing else, for example.
You have that level of control to
customize the behavior of this to help
you instead of forcing you to
do something that doesn't work.
Number four, the focus shifts from
this idea of static typing as the main
design goal to more about inferring or
annotating the values.
In other words, it embraces value
types instead of variable types.
And you'll see in the code in
just a moment what that means.
Optionally of course, you can have all
those static typing errors being omitted
if those are ones that you wanna see.
I'm not gonna have that
option turned on but
I'm gonna build a tool that has it in
case that's something that you wanna see.
Follow me?
And lastly the design goal here is that I
wanna go with the grain of JavaScript and
not against it.
I'm not trying to make
a different JavaScript.
I'm trying to improve what
we have with JavaScript.
So, starting out as the same example
as you got from the Flow and
Typescript example.
You can define a variable and if you
have the option configured on it's gonna
complain at you about your static type.
It's gonna say hey, you assigned a string,
and now you're assigning an object and
that's an error.
So you have the option of getting that
error just like you did in the past.
It's doing the inference, it's inferring
that you assigned a string to teacher, and
then it's inferring that
you're assigning an object.
So in the base case, it's very similar,
in terms of it's building
from inference up into it.
But this is where things start to diverge,
because if you want to have those sorts
of errors, but you only wanna have those
errors when you've said what the type is
and not when it inferred it, for example.
So, let's say don't complain to
me about those inferences but
do complain at me when I violate
the type annotations that
I've done when I've been
more explicit about it.
So here's what it looks like if you wanna
annotate something like that string Kyle
you wanna explicitly say that's a string.
You put, as you can see here,
this thing in front of it.
Now that is actually still standard
JavaScript because that is a template tag.
That's entirely standard JavaScript,
but it's a template tag.
And TypL is going to use the name
of that template tag to say, okay,
you're telling me that you want this
value to be interpreted as a string.
If you use a different type like number
for example, the thing that's in the back
tick quote swill be interpreted in that
form, so it would say 42 or whatever.
Here I'm saying I want teacher to be
interpreted as holding the string Kyle.
And notice something,
that this is immediately off the bat
already different from Flow and
Typescript, because here, I am gonna
annotate the value in an object property.
I don't need to go create a whole type for
this kind of object
that says that name properties are
strings, I'm annotating the value itself.
>> Kyle: And that can be implied to
properties or variables if you want it to.
But it's not necessary that I go create
another type to give it that type
information.
So you wanna think about it more like your
annotating all the places that values and
expressions occur rather than
annotating the types on your variables.
>> Kyle: Because that's I think
were we have all our problems.
Where all of our values and
expressions get all mixed up.
I don't think we have as many problems
with our variables getting reassigned.
You can also be more explicit even in
this particular case you could tag
that thing as an object.
You'll notice that I still have the object
literal dropped inside of a template
tagged expression.
But this is now saying
it's absolutely an object,
don't just guess that it's an object,
it's absolutely an object.
So that would put it into the realm of
the error is from tagged type violation
as opposed to an inferred type violation.
>> Kyle: Here I'm saying that
the age property on this object,
is at the moment gonna hold integer 42.
So in TypL,
you can make distinctions between numbers,
integers, finite values, and big Ns.
So there's not just one number type,
you have four number types actually.
And importantly, down here, I am saying
wherever student.age comes from,
I'm essentially asserting
that it has to be a number.
So if student.age comes from somewhere and
it's not a number,
this is going to be an error.
It will either be a compiler error, if the
compiler can figure out that student.age
is not gonna be a number or it will be
a runtime error if it can't figure it out.
But either way, I'm essentially doing
assertions in-line in my values and
expressions.
Saying, this thing has to be a number,
this thing has to be an integer.
>> Kyle: You can use the same style still
to deal with the type signatures on your
functions.
So here,
I have a default value expression,
which I'm overloading to allow me to
do a type signature for this function.
I'm saying that studentRec should
be assumed to be this object.
Now, I could've annotated it
with a tag to say object, but
here I'm just making an object.
So it's gonna infer that studentRec
needs to be an object with a name and
name has to be interpreted as a string.
All of this is still totally
standard valid JavaScript, and
if you shipped this code to
a browser it would all run.
It may not do all of the same things
that it would at the compile stage,
but it would all run and compile.
So the compiler can pick
up on that information and
say okay that's cool you want an object
with a name property that holds a string.
Which means that when I return
studentrRec.name I know that I'm returning
a string.
And because I know I'm returning a string,
down here at the bottom when I assign it,
now I can imply that the for
student name is gonna be a string.
So all of the same things that you could
get out of Typescript, but if you compare
this example before I didn't need to go to
all of this extra work to set up a custom
type to give you that information because
I put the typing on the values themselves.
>> Kyle: We can make all the same kinds
of assertions about what gets passed into
functions, what gets returned from them,
whether they are inferred or
whether they are tagged.
And by the way, those type signatures
are persistent and can also be in line.
So here,
I am annotating a callback type signature.
The on record function is a callback, but
I am saying that it must fit this
particular function signature.
So that function means
that it has to receive
an object that has a name
property that's a string and
the function has to return the void
basically the undefined type.
So that's an inline signature.
But notice what happens down here is
that I can assign a function to another
variable and the type signature of print
name is persistent so when I pass it in
as a callback it gets matched to the type
signature that is required from line 3.
So all those same things that you would
expect out of a Typescript or a Flow,
we're doing those same
sorts of things here,
it's just we're doing them on the values
instead of on the containers.
>> Kyle: A lot of improvements on
the inferencing that I've been focusing
on recently.
This is a particularly
interesting example because this
is a case that TypeScript and
Flow don't handle.
Maybe they will eventually but
they currently do not do
anything in this particular case.
So looks like a pretty simple example but
there's more complexity here
than you might realize.
So number one, we have a function call
earlier in the code we're relying
upon a function hoisting.
We have a function call earlier in the
code than where we've seen that function.
So we can't really validate whether
this is correct according to
the signature or not.
So we're at least gonna have to
have some sort of second pass, and
TypL has this multi-pass inferencing.
In addition to having multi-pass
inferencing, when we get to the function
we see that the parameter does
not have any defined name on it.
So what we're going to do is infer that
this of type int because
we are passing in an int.
So we're gonna infer the function
signature from the call sign.
So we have already seen this call site,
and when we get here,
we are gonna say ah-ha,
I remember that you passed in a 3 earlier,
so now we're gonna infer
that num is an integer.
And because we know num is an integer,
we now know what the return value of this
function is, because there's a return
statement with that variable.
So when we do our second pass through,
we now know that gimme is going to return
an integer, because it passed in and
returned an integer.
So now we can apply the type integer to 3,
and
now we can complain that you're
adding a string and an integer.
So there's this multi-pass
inferencing that's happening,
and this took several weeks
of work to make it work.
But if you try that same code example
in something like TypeScript or Flow,
they just infer any and
don't report an error.
So this is an example, I think, where TypL
shines because it focuses on the value
types rather than on the variables.
>> Kyle: [COUGH] Compiler versus runtime.
As I said, the compiler will try to figure
out everything that it can, if you're
using the compiler, of course, it'll try
to figure out everything that it can.
But if it can figure something out,
it removes that stuff from the code, so
it's not gonna burden down the runtime.
But any place that it can't figure it out,
it leaves the runtime assertions in place.
So in this code example we've got a set
of parameters here that are typed,
we're saying name is a string, topic
is a string that is defaulted to empty,
count is an integer
that is defaulted to 0.
So those are things that the compiler
would pick up on, and say okay I know
about the function signature, and I need
to validate that function signature.
But what would ship to production is
a reduced set of this because there
are some places where we already know
that we can validate it at compile time.
For example, lines 9 and 10,
we already know that those are strings
nothing at runtime could change that.
So we can validate that
stuff at compile time and
then remove those so they don't
burden down the code and the runtime.
So, what this compiler would do is
rework this code to look like this.
So now you see on lines 2, 3, and 4 we
still have our parameters with our default
values in them, but now we have those
type assertions in line in the code.
So we are gonna guarantee at runtime that
every time this function gets called,
you always pass in a string for the first
two and an integer for the second one.
The way that works is that those tag
functions are actual tag functions that
the compiler includes with the runtime.
And they validate at runtime,
what you've passed in.
>> Kyle: And we've removed the teacher and
the workshop assertions on lines 10 and
11.
We left in the assertion on line 13
because here we have an expression and
we need to verify that what is in
fact coming in is actually a number.
That is actually an integer cuz it could
be a nan or it could be infinity and
those are not integers.
>> Kyle: So
that's just a quick brief glimpse of that.
Everything that I showed, or most
everything that I showed you already works
with the code, but
none of this is documented or released.
If you wanna play around with it,
you can check out that repo.
I'm hoping that sometime within the next
few weeks that we will have a 1.0 release
of that, and then there's
a lot more that we want to do.
But that's what I think embraces
JavaScript's typing system and
makes it better rather than trying
to rewire to a different DNA.Ç